README.md, before:

# Data Model

## Installation/Development
If you'd like to test out the code yourself, please take a look at [INSTALLATION.md](./INSTALLATION.md)

## Entity Relationship Diagram
```mermaid
erDiagram
    date {
        date date_day PK "Unique B-tree index"
        date prior_date_day
        date next_date_day
    }
    dim_date {
        date date_day PK "Unique B-tree index"
        date prior_date_day
        date next_date_day
    }
    dim_object {
        string object_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_product {
        string product_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_verb {
        string verb_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_user {
        string user_id PK "Unique B-tree index"
    }
    fct_event {
        string id PK
        string user_id FK
        string verb_key FK
        string object_key FK
        string product_key FK
        date date_day FK "hash index"
        timestamp event_ts

    }
    lu_date_group {
        string id PK
        string description
    }
    rel_day_group {
        date date_day PK "Non-unique partial B-tree index"
        string date_group_id PK "Non-unique partial B-tree index"
        date reporting_day
    }
    date ||--|| dim_date:::bg : "date_day"
    dim_date ||--o{ fct_event : "date_day"
    lu_date_group }|--|{ rel_day_group : "Cross Join"
    rel_day_group }|--|{ fct_event : "date_day"
    dim_object ||--o{ fct_event : "object_key"
    dim_product ||--o{ fct_event : "product_key"
    dim_user ||--o{ fct_event : "user_id"
    dim_verb ||--o{ fct_event : "verb_key"
```

## Analytics Answers

#### Request 1
How many users with more than 5 events last week by product?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean 5 distinct user and product combinations within the week prior to today's date are the filtering criteria

#### Answer
```sql
SELECT f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key,
   COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
FROM fct_event AS f_ev
INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
    ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
        AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lw'
        AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key
HAVING COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) > 5
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 2
How many events per user per product last week?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean any distinct user and product combination within the week prior of today's date should be counted and summed.

#### Answer
```sql
SELECT f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key,
   COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
FROM fct_event AS f_ev
INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
    ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
        AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lw'
        AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 3
How many 'selected' verb events by product by month?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean filter the events to only ones with a 'selected' verb value, then count them grouped by product and month (used YYYY-MM for multi-year clarity).

Also set the date window to work within the current year with the expectation it would be adjusted or removed. 

#### Answer
```sql
WITH source AS (
    SELECT product_key,
        DATE_TRUNC('month', date_day) AS yyyymm,
        COUNT(id) AS event_cnt
        FROM fct_event AS f_ev
        LEFT JOIN dim_verb AS d_v
            ON f_ev.verb_key = d_v.verb_key
        WHERE LOWER(d_v.description) = 'selected'
            AND date_day BETWEEN DATE_TRUNC('year', CURRENT_DATE) AND DATE_TRUNC('year', CURRENT_DATE) + INTERVAL '1 year' -- could also join to dim_date for start/end dates
        GROUP BY product_key, 
            yyyymm
),
final AS (
    SELECT source.*,
        d_p.description
        FROM source
        INNER JOIN dim_product AS d_p
            ON source.product_key = d_p.product_key
)
SELECT description AS product,
    to_char(yyyymm, 'YYYY-MM') AS yyyymm,
    event_cnt
FROM final
ORDER BY product ASC,
    yyyymm ASC
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 4
How many overall events by user last month segmented by verbs?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean count and sum any event grouped by user and verb that occurred in the month prior to today's date.

#### Answer
```sql
WITH source AS (
    SELECT f_ev.user_id,
    f_ev.verb_key,
    COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
    FROM fct_event AS f_ev
    INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
        ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
            AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lm'
            AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
    GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
    f_ev.verb_key
),
final AS (
    SELECT source.user_id, -- would replace with something more meaningful but my sample data only has user_id :)
        d_v.description,
        event_cnt
        FROM source
        LEFT JOIN dim_user AS d_u
            ON source.user_id = d_u.user_id
        LEFT JOIN dim_verb AS d_v
            ON source.verb_key = d_v.verb_key
)
SELECT *
    FROM final
```
<br><hr>

#### Other questions that can be answered
1. Year over year comparisons become easy as an analyst is able to grab each year's dataset

Commit message:

^docs: Added to answers section with additional derivatives and benefits

README.md, after:

# Data Model

## Installation/Development
If you'd like to test out the code yourself, please take a look at [INSTALLATION.md](./INSTALLATION.md)

## Entity Relationship Diagram
```mermaid
erDiagram
    date {
        date date_day PK "Unique B-tree index"
        date prior_date_day
        date next_date_day
    }
    dim_date {
        date date_day PK "Unique B-tree index"
        date prior_date_day
        date next_date_day
    }
    dim_object {
        string object_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_product {
        string product_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_verb {
        string verb_key PK "Unique B-tree index"
        string description
    }
    dim_user {
        string user_id PK "Unique B-tree index"
    }
    fct_event {
        string id PK
        string user_id FK
        string verb_key FK
        string object_key FK
        string product_key FK
        date date_day FK "hash index"
        timestamp event_ts

    }
    lu_date_group {
        string id PK
        string description
    }
    rel_day_group {
        date date_day PK "Non-unique partial B-tree index"
        string date_group_id PK "Non-unique partial B-tree index"
        date reporting_day
    }
    date ||--|| dim_date:::bg : "date_day"
    dim_date ||--o{ fct_event : "date_day"
    lu_date_group }|--|{ rel_day_group : "Cross Join"
    rel_day_group }|--|{ fct_event : "date_day"
    dim_object ||--o{ fct_event : "object_key"
    dim_product ||--o{ fct_event : "product_key"
    dim_user ||--o{ fct_event : "user_id"
    dim_verb ||--o{ fct_event : "verb_key"
```

## Analytics Answers

#### Request 1
How many users with more than 5 events last week by product?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean 5 distinct user and product combinations within the week prior to today's date are the filtering criteria

#### Answer
```sql
SELECT f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key,
   COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
FROM fct_event AS f_ev
INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
    ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
        AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lw'
        AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key
HAVING COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) > 5
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 2
How many events per user per product last week?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean any distinct user and product combination within the week prior of today's date should be counted and summed.

#### Answer
```sql
SELECT f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key,
   COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
FROM fct_event AS f_ev
INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
    ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
        AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lw'
        AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
   f_ev.product_key
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 3
How many 'selected' verb events by product by month?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean filter the events to only ones with a 'selected' verb value, then count them grouped by product and month (used YYYY-MM for multi-year clarity).

Also set the date window to work within the current year with the expectation it would be adjusted or removed. 

#### Answer
```sql
WITH source AS (
    SELECT product_key,
        DATE_TRUNC('month', date_day) AS yyyymm,
        COUNT(id) AS event_cnt
        FROM fct_event AS f_ev
        LEFT JOIN dim_verb AS d_v
            ON f_ev.verb_key = d_v.verb_key
        WHERE LOWER(d_v.description) = 'selected'
            AND date_day BETWEEN DATE_TRUNC('year', CURRENT_DATE) AND DATE_TRUNC('year', CURRENT_DATE) + INTERVAL '1 year' -- could also join to dim_date for start/end dates
        GROUP BY product_key, 
            yyyymm
),
final AS (
    SELECT source.*,
        d_p.description
        FROM source
        INNER JOIN dim_product AS d_p
            ON source.product_key = d_p.product_key
)
SELECT description AS product,
    to_char(yyyymm, 'YYYY-MM') AS yyyymm,
    event_cnt
FROM final
ORDER BY product ASC,
    yyyymm ASC
```
<br><hr>

#### Request 4
How many overall events by user last month segmented by verbs?

#### Assumptions
I took the request to mean count and sum any event grouped by user and verb that occurred in the month prior to today's date.

#### Answer
```sql
WITH source AS (
    SELECT f_ev.user_id,
    f_ev.verb_key,
    COUNT(DISTINCT f_ev.id) AS event_cnt
    FROM fct_event AS f_ev
    INNER JOIN rel_date_group AS rdg
        ON f_ev.date_day = rdg.date_day
            AND rdg.date_group_id = 'lm'
            AND rdg.reporting_day = CURRENT_DATE
    GROUP BY f_ev.user_id,
    f_ev.verb_key
),
final AS (
    SELECT source.user_id, -- would replace with something more meaningful but my sample data only has user_id :)
        d_v.description,
        event_cnt
        FROM source
        LEFT JOIN dim_user AS d_u
            ON source.user_id = d_u.user_id
        LEFT JOIN dim_verb AS d_v
            ON source.verb_key = d_v.verb_key
)
SELECT *
    FROM final
```
<br><hr>

#### Other questions that can be answered
1. Year over year comparisons become easy as an analyst is able to grab each year's dataset and drill down as needed (by quarter, week, day, etc..)
2. User activity and trend analysis
3. Aggregation tables can easily be built off the fact to help with common query paths (weekly rollup, monthly rollup, etc)
4. Product popularity and adoption rate
5. User profile trend towards and product
6. Click analysis (page load to action timings; indicates information accessibility)

#### Additional Benefits
1. Dimensions are easily expanded now. No logic changes needed.
2. Additional time ranges can be added easily if they don't match existing (shifted fiscal ranges)
3. Categories can be built of top of the dims for bucketing (product)
